Lung cancer is the number one cause of cancer-related deaths. The malignancy is
characterized by dismal prognosis and poor clinical outcome mostly due to
advanced-stage at diagnosis, thereby inflicting a heavy burden on public health
worldwide. Recent breakthroughs in immunotherapy have greatly benefited a subset 
of lung cancer patients, and more importantly, they are undauntedly bringing
forth a paradigm shift in the drugs approved for cancer treatment, by introducing
“tumor-type agnostic therapies”. Yet, and to fulfill immunotherapy's potential of
personalized cancer treatment, demarcating the immune and genomic landscape of
cancers at their earliest possible stages will be crucial to identify ideal
targets for early treatment and to predict how a particular patient will fare
with immunotherapy. Recent genomic surveys of premalignant lung cancer have shed 
light on early alterations in the evolution of lung cancer. More recently, the
advent of immunogenomic technologies has provided prodigious opportunities to
study the multidimensional landscape of lung tumors as well as their
microenvironment at the molecular, genomic, and cellular resolution. In this
review, we will summarize the current state of immune-based therapies for cancer,
with a focus on lung malignancy, and highlight learning outcomes from clinical
and preclinical studies investigating the naïve immune biology of lung cancer.
The review also collates immunogenomic-based evidence from seminal reports which 
collectively warrant future investigations of premalignancy, the tumor-adjacent
normal-appearing lung tissue, pulmonary inflammatory conditions such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, as well as systemic microbiome imbalance. Such
future directions enable novel insights into the evolution of lung cancers and,
thus, can provide a low-hanging fruit of targets for early immune-based treatment
of this fatal malignancy.

The immune system plays a dual role in tumor evolution—it can identify and
control nascent tumor cells in a process called immunosurveillance and can
promote tumor progression through immunosuppression via various mechanisms. Thus,
bilateral host-protective and tumor-promoting actions of immunity are integrated 
as cancer immunoediting. In this decade, immune checkpoint inhibitors,
specifically programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) pathway inhibitors, have changed the 
treatment paradigm of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). These agents
are approved for the treatment of patients with NSCLC and demonstrate impressive 
clinical activity and durable responses in some patients. However, for many NSCLC
patients, the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors is limited. To optimize
the full utility of the immune system for eradicating cancer, a broader
understanding of cancer immunosurveillance and immunoediting is essential. In
this review, we discuss the fundamental knowledge of the phenomena and provide an
overview of the next-generation immunotherapies in the pipeline.

Lung cancer is among the most common cancers with a high mortality rate
worldwide. Despite the significant advances in diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches, lung cancer prognoses and survival rates remain poor due to late
diagnosis, drug resistance, and adverse effects. Therefore, new intervention
therapies, such as the use of natural compounds with decreased toxicities, have
been considered in lung cancer therapy. Curcumin, a natural occurring polyphenol 
derived from turmeric (Curcuma longa) has been studied extensively in recent
years for its therapeutic effects. It has been shown that curcumin demonstrates
anti-cancer effects in lung cancer through various mechanisms, including
inhibition of cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis, induction of
apoptosis, epigenetic alterations, and regulation of microRNA expression. Several
in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that these mechanisms are modulated by
multiple molecular targets such as STAT3, EGFR, FOXO3a, TGF-β, eIF2α, COX-2,
Bcl-2, PI3KAkt/mTOR, ROS, Fas/FasL, Cdc42, E-cadherin, MMPs, and adiponectin. In 
addition, limitations, strategies to overcome curcumin bioavailability, and
potential side effects as well as clinical trials were also reviewed.

Most cancers are resistant to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and chemotherapy. Herein we
identify PDLIM2 as a tumor suppressor particularly important for lung cancer
therapeutic responses. While PDLIM2 is epigenetically repressed in human lung
cancer, associating with therapeutic resistance and poor prognosis, its global or
lung epithelial-specific deletion in mice causes increased lung cancer
development, chemoresistance, and complete resistance to anti-PD-1 and epigenetic
drugs. PDLIM2 epigenetic restoration or ectopic expression shows antitumor
activity, and synergizes with anti-PD-1, notably, with chemotherapy for complete 
remission of most lung cancers. Mechanistically, through repressing NF-κB/RelA
and STAT3, PDLIM2 increases expression of genes involved in antigen presentation 
and T-cell activation while repressing multidrug resistance genes and
cancer-related genes, thereby rendering cancer cells vulnerable to immune attacks
and therapies. We identify PDLIM2-independent PD-L1 induction by chemotherapeutic
and epigenetic drugs as another mechanism for their synergy with anti-PD-1. These
findings establish a rationale to use combination therapies for cancer treatment.

Manipulation of the immune response is a game changer in lung cancer treatment,
revolutionizing management. PD1 and CTLA4 are dynamically expressed on different 
T cell subsets that can either disrupt or sustain tumor growth. Monoclonal
antibodies (MoAbs) against PD1/PDL1 and CTLA4 have shown that inhibitory signals 
can be impaired, blocking T cell activation and function. MoAbs, used as both
single-agents or in combination with standard therapy for the treatment of
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), have exhibited advantages in terms
of overall survival and response rate; nivolumab, pembrolizumab, atezolizumab and
more recently, durvalumab, have already been approved for lung cancer treatment
and more compounds are in the pipeline. A better understanding of signaling
elicited by these antibodies on T cell subsets, as well as identification of
biological determinants of sensitivity, resistance and correlates of efficacy,
will help to define the mechanisms of antitumor responses. In addition, the
relevance of T regulatory cells (Treg) involved in immune responses in cancer is 
attracting increasing interest. A major challenge for future research is to
understand why a durable response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) occurs
only in subsets of patients and the mechanisms of resistance after an initial
response. This review will explore current understanding and future direction of 
research on ICI treatment in lung cancer and the impact of tumor immune
microenvironment n influencing clinical responses.

Recent research on cancer-associated microbial communities has elucidated the
interplay between bacteria, immune cells, and tumor cells; the bacterial pathways
involved in the induction of carcinogenesis; and their clinical significance.
Although accumulating evidence shows that a dysbiotic condition is associated
with lung carcinogenesis, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
Microorganisms possibly trigger tumor initiation and progression, presumably via 
the production of bacterial toxins and other pro-inflammatory factors. The
purpose of this review is to discuss the basic role of the airway microbiome in
carcinogenesis and the underlying molecular mechanisms, with the aim of
developing anticancer strategies involving the airway microbiota. In addition,
the mechanisms via which the microbiome acts as a modulator of immunotherapies in
lung cancer are summarized.

In recent years, the evolution of treatments has made it possible to
significantly improve the outcomes of patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). In particular, while molecular targeted therapies are effective in
specific patient sub-groups, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have greatly
influenced the outcomes of a large proportion of NSCLC patients. While nivolumab 
activity was initially assessed irrespective of predictive biomarkers, subsequent
pivotal studies involving other PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in pre-treated advanced
NSCLC (atezolizumab within the OAK study and pembrolizumab in the Keynote 010
study) reported the first correlations between clinical outcomes and PD-L1
expression. However, PD-L1 could not be sufficient on its own to select patients 
who may benefit from immunotherapy. Many studies have tried to discover more
precise markers that are derived from tumor tissue or from peripheral blood. This
review aims to analyze any characteristics of the immunogram that could be used
as a predictive biomarker for response to ICIs. Furthermore, we describe the most
important genetic alteration that might predict the activity of immunotherapy.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 10–15% of all lung
cancers. The prognosis is poor with median survival in the advanced stage
remaining at around 12 months. Despite applying every known therapeutic approach,
no major breakthrough has improved the overall survival in the last 30 years.
Historically, experiments performed on conventional cell lines may have
limitations of not accurately reflecting the complex biological and genomic
heterogeneity of this disease. However, additional knowledge gained from recently
developed genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) and patient derived
xenografts (PDXs) have made encouraging inroads. Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
data reveals a high mutational burden and a number of genetic alterations but low
frequency of targetable mutations. Despite several failures, considerable
therapeutic opportunities have recently emerged. Potentially promising therapies 
include those targeting DNA damage repair, stem cell/renewal and drug resistant
mechanisms. Modest success has also been achieved with immune checkpoint
inhibitors while therapeutic exploration of various other components of the
immune system is underway. However, the complex heterogeneities reflect the need 
for accurate bio-markers to translate novel discoveries into clinical benefit.
Additionally, the molecular mechanisms that differentiate chemo-sensitive from
chemo-refractory disease remain unknown. Obtaining reliable tumour samples by
utilising novel techniques such as endobronchial ultrasound guided needle
aspiration or adopting to liquid biopsies are becoming popular. This review will 
focus on recent technological and therapeutic advancements to surmount this
recalcitrant disease.

Lung cancer remains a serious oncological problem worldwide. The delayed
diagnosis and a prevalence of advanced stages in up to 70% of cases at
recognition are still observed. Thanks to targeted therapies and immunotherapy a 
significant progress in achieving prolonged survival in some lung cancer patients
is reported. A precise histopathological diagnosis, especially the recognition of
adenocarcinoma, and a progress in the methods of clinical staging underlie the
proper qualification of patients for a tailored therapy. The deep molecular
characteristics of lung cancer in liquid biopsy, for example blood,
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), cell suspension from needle aspirates, are
currently available. The molecular characteristic has recently been extended with
molecular aberrations of BRAF, KRAS, MET, ERBB2, RET, NTRK next to the well-known
EGFR mutations and ALK, ROS-1 relocation. The present paper discusses the
usefulness of adequate pathological methods and molecular testing for the
identification of a broad spectrum of predictive biomarkers for a
molecular-directed lung cancer therapy. Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint
inhibitors (ICIs) is approved in the first line therapy of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer. To date only PD-L1 expression on tumor cells has been
found to be a marker of response to ICIs. The efficacy of ICIs as well as the
susceptibility to immune-related adverse events are highly individual, so immune 
biomarkers are widely investigated. The candidates for predictive factors for
ICIs immunotherapy include cancer cell antigenicity, presence of
regulatory/suppressory molecules on cancer cells, cancer stem cells or on
exosomes, and, on the other hand, an immune status of the patient. Cancers with
high immune infiltration in the tumor milieu, referred to as “hot” tumors, seem
to ensure a better response to ICIs than the “cold” ones. BALF analysis may
replace cancer tissue examination, which is of limited access in advanced stages,
for the recognition of the nature of immune response in the tumor environment.
Tumor mutational burden (TMB) was shown to correlate with a good response to
ICIs, especially when combined with other anticancer therapies. The present paper
demonstrates the results of recent studies on lung cancer characteristics which
bring us closer to the definition of useful prognostic/predictive factors.

In response to DNA damage, a synthetic lethal relationship exists between the
cell cycle checkpoint kinase MK2 and the tumor suppressor p53. Here, we describe 
the concept of augmented synthetic lethality (ASL): depletion of a third gene
product enhances a pre-existing synthetic lethal combination. We show that loss
of the DNA repair protein XPA markedly augments the synthetic lethality between
MK2 and p53, enhancing anti-tumor responses alone and in combination with
cisplatin chemotherapy. Delivery of siRNA-peptide nanoplexes co-targeting MK2 and
XPA to pre-existing p53-deficient tumors in a highly aggressive, immunocompetent 
mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma improves long-term survival and cisplatin
response beyond those of the synthetic lethal p53 mutant/MK2 combination alone.
These findings establish a mechanism for co-targeting DNA damage-induced cell
cycle checkpoints in combination with repair of cisplatin-DNA lesions in vivo
using RNAi nanocarriers, and motivate further exploration of ASL as a generalized
strategy to improve cancer treatment.

Radiotherapy is one of the most common countermeasures for treating a wide range 
of tumors. However, the radioresistance of cancer cells is still a major
limitation for radiotherapy applications. Efforts are continuously ongoing to
explore sensitizing targets and develop radiosensitizers for improving the
outcomes of radiotherapy. DNA double-strand breaks are the most lethal lesions
induced by ionizing radiation and can trigger a series of cellular DNA damage
responses (DDRs), including those helping cells recover from radiation injuries, 
such as the activation of DNA damage sensing and early transduction pathways,
cell cycle arrest, and DNA repair. Obviously, these protective DDRs confer tumor 
radioresistance. Targeting DDR signaling pathways has become an attractive
strategy for overcoming tumor radioresistance, and some important advances and
breakthroughs have already been achieved in recent years. On the basis of
comprehensively reviewing the DDR signal pathways, we provide an update on the
novel and promising druggable targets emerging from DDR pathways that can be
exploited for radiosensitization. We further discuss recent advances identified
from preclinical studies, current clinical trials, and clinical application of
chemical inhibitors targeting key DDR proteins, including DNA-PKcs (DNA-dependent
protein kinase, catalytic subunit), ATM/ATR (ataxia–telangiectasia mutated and
Rad3-related), the MRN (MRE11-RAD50-NBS1) complex, the PARP (poly[ADP-ribose]
polymerase) family, MDC1, Wee1, LIG4 (ligase IV), CDK1, BRCA1 (BRCA1 C terminal),
CHK1, and HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor-1). Challenges for ionizing
radiation-induced signal transduction and targeted therapy are also discussed
based on recent achievements in the biological field of radiotherapy.

Somatic alterations in the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) result in
aberrant activation of kinase signaling and occur in ∼15% of non-small cell lung 
cancers (NSCLC). Patients diagnosed with EGFR-mutant NSCLC have good initial
clinical response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs), yet tumor
recurrence is common and quick to develop. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to
EGFR TKIs have been studied extensively over the past decade. Great progress has 
been made in understanding two major routes of therapeutic failure: additional
genomic alterations in the EGFR gene and activation of alternative kinase
signaling (so-called “bypass activation”). Several pharmacological agents aimed
at overcoming these modes of EGFR TKI resistance are FDA-approved or under
clinical development. Phenotypic transformation, a less common and less well
understood mechanism of EGFR TKI resistance is yet to be addressed in the clinic.
In the context of acquired EGFR TKI resistance, phenotypic transformation
encompasses epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), transformation of
adenocarcinoma of the lung (LUAD) to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) or small cell 
lung cancer (SCLC). SCLC transformation, or neuroendocrine differentiation, has
been linked to inactivation of TP53 and RB1 signaling. However, the exact
mechanism that permits lineage switching needs further investigation. Recent
reports indicate that LUAD and SCLC have a common cell of origin, and that
trans-differentiation occurs under the right conditions. Options for therapeutic 
targeting of EGFR-mutant SCLC are limited currently to conventional genotoxic
chemotherapy. Similarly, the basis of EMT-associated resistance is not clear. EMT
is a complex process that can be characterized by a spectrum of intermediate
states with diverse expression of epithelial and mesenchymal factors. In the
context of acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs, EMT frequently co-occurs with bypass
activation, making it challenging to determine the exact contribution of EMT to
therapeutic failure. Reversibility of EMT-associated resistance points toward its
epigenetic origin, with additional adjustments, such as genetic alterations and
bypass activation, occurring later during disease progression. This review will
discuss the mechanistic basis for EGFR TKI resistance linked to phenotypic
transformation, as well as challenges and opportunities in addressing this type
of targeted therapy resistance in EGFR-mutant NSCLC.

Lung cancer is one of the deadliest forms of cancer affecting society today.
Non-coding RNAs, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and 
circular RNAs (circRNAs), through the transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and 
epigenetic changes they impose, have been found to be dysregulated to affect lung
cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis. This review will briefly summarize hallmarks
involved in lung cancer initiation and progression. For initiation, these
hallmarks include tumor initiating cells, immortalization, activation of
oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressors. Hallmarks involved in lung
cancer progression include metastasis and drug tolerance and resistance. The
targeting of these hallmarks with non-coding RNAs can affect vital metabolic and 
cell signaling pathways, which as a result can potentially have a role in
cancerous and pathological processes. By further understanding non-coding RNAs,
researchers can work towards diagnoses and treatments to improve early detection 
and clinical response.

Chemoprevention of lung cancer is thought to significantly reduce the risk of
acquiring these conditions in the subpopulation of patients with underlying
health issues, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder and
smoking-associated lung problems. Many strategies have been tested in the
previous decades, with very few translating to successful clinical trials in
specific subpopulations of patients. In this review, we analyze these strategies,
as well as new approaches that have emerged throughout the last few years,
including synthetic lethality concept and microbiome-induced regulation of lung
carcinogenesis. Overall, the continuous effort in the area of lung
chemoprevention is required to develop practical therapeutical approaches. Given 
the inconsistency of results obtained in clinical trials targeting lung cancer
chemoprevention in various subgroups of patients that differ in the underlying
health condition, race, and gender, we believe that individualized approaches
will have more promise than generalized treatments.

Each year there will be an estimated 2.1 million new lung cancer cases and 1.8
million lung cancer deaths worldwide. Tobacco smoke is the No.1 risk factors of
lung cancer, accounting for > 85% lung cancer deaths. Air pollution, or haze,
comprises ambient air pollution and household air pollution, which are reported
to cause 252,000 and 304,000 lung cancer deaths each year, respectively. Tobacco 
smoke and haze (hereafter, smohaze) contain fine particles originated from
insufficient combustion of biomass or coal, have quite similar carcinogens, and
cause similar diseases. Smohaze exert hazardous effects on exposed populations,
including induction of a large amount of mutations in the genome, alternative
splicing of mRNAs, abnormalities in epigenomics, initiation of tumor-promoting
chronic inflammation, and facilitating immune escape of transformed cells.
Tackling smohaze and development of multi-targets-based preventive and
therapeutic approaches targeting smohaze-induced carcinogenesis are the key to
conquer lung cancer in the future.

The inhibition of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway in the treatment of
cancer has recently gained interest, and different DDR inhibitors have been
developed. Among them, the most promising ones target the WEE1 kinase family,
which has a crucial role in cell cycle regulation and DNA damage identification
and repair in both nonmalignant and cancer cells. This review recapitulates and
discusses the most recent findings on the biological function of WEE1/PKMYT1
during the cell cycle and in the DNA damage repair, with a focus on their dual
role as tumor suppressors in nonmalignant cells and pseudo-oncogenes in cancer
cells. We here report the available data on the molecular and functional
alterations of WEE1/PKMYT1 kinases in both hematological and solid tumors.
Moreover, we summarize the preclinical information on 36 chemo/radiotherapy
agents, and in particular their effect on cell cycle checkpoints and on the
cellular WEE1/PKMYT1-dependent response. Finally, this review outlines the most
important pre-clinical and clinical data available on the efficacy of WEE1/PKMYT1
inhibitors in monotherapy and in combination with chemo/radiotherapy agents or
with other selective inhibitors currently used or under evaluation for the
treatment of cancer patients.

Hypoxia occurs naturally at high-altitudes and pathologically in hypoxic solid
tumors. Here, we report that genes involved in various human cancers evolved
rapidly in Tibetans and six Tibetan domestic mammals compared to reciprocal
lowlanders. Furthermore, m6A modified mRNA binding protein YTHDF1, one of
evolutionary positively selected genes for high-altitude adaptation is amplified 
in various cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We show that
YTHDF1 deficiency inhibits NSCLC cell proliferation and xenograft tumor formation
through regulating the translational efficiency of CDK2, CDK4, and cyclin D1, and
that YTHDF1 depletion restrains de novo lung adenocarcinomas (ADC) progression.
However, we observe that YTHDF1 high expression correlates with better clinical
outcome, with its depletion rendering cancerous cells resistant to cisplatin
(DDP) treatment. Mechanistic studies identified the Keap1-Nrf2-AKR1C1 axis as the
downstream mediator of YTHDF1. Together, these findings highlight the critical
role of YTHDF1 in both hypoxia adaptation and pathogenesis of NSCLC.

Background: Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer worldwide. A major
drawback in the lung cancer treatment field is the lack of realistic mouse models
that replicate the complexity of human malignancy and immune contexture within
the tumor microenvironment. Such models are urgently needed. Mutations of the
tumor protein p53 are among the most common alterations in human lung cancers.
Methods: Previously, we developed a line of lung cancer mouse model where mutant 
human TP53-273H is expressed in a lung specific manner in FVB/N background. To
investigate whether the human TP53 mutant has a similar oncogenic potential when 
it is expressed in another strain of mouse, we crossed the FVB/N-SPC-TP53-273H
mice to A/J strain and created A/J-SPC-TP53-273H transgenic mice. We then
compared lung tumor formation between A/J-SPC-TP53-273H and FVB/N-SPC-TP53-273H. 
Results: We found the TP53-273H mutant gene has a similar oncogenic potential in 
lung tumor formation in both mice strains, although A/J strain mice have been
found to be a highly susceptible strain in terms of carcinogen-induced lung
cancer. Both transgenic lines survived more than 18 months and developed age
related lung adenocarcinomas. With micro CT imaging, we found the
FVB-SPC-TP53-273H mice survived more than 8 weeks after initial detection of lung
cancer, providing a sufficient window for evaluating new anti-cancer agents.
Conclusions: Oncogenic potential of the most common genetic mutation, TP53-273H, 
in human lung cancer is unique when it is expressed in different strains of mice.
Our mouse models are useful tools for testing novel immune checkpoint inhibitors 
or other therapeutic strategies in the treatment of lung cancer.
